# IS-477-Course-Project - Relationship between NBA Stats & NBA Salaries
# Richard &amp; Michael

## Summary
This project investigates the relationship between NBA player performance statistics and player salaries from 2000-2024. We were motivated because we wanted to further understand how measurable performance metrics (Points, Rebounds, Assists, and Turnovers) impact players compensation in the NBA. In the NBA, player salaries vary widely, factors such as talent and reputation affect these salaries. While we understand there are many more factors other then statistics that affect a player’s salary, we wanted to find a way to quantify the connection between statistical output and salary. We also wanted to understand if there were any statistics that were more important than the others. As NBA fans we also wanted to explore if statistics that are more position specific, such as rebounds for centers, showing that position could also influence salaries. By analyzing historical salary and performance data, this project aims to provide a data-driven answer to player compensation, offering insights into which statistics are most correlated with higher salaries. This data could help General Managers efficiently offer contracts that are worth the player, making sure they don’t overpay a player, based only on data. 

Our main research question is: How strongly do player statistics correlate with their salaries? Our secondary research question is: Which metrics are most predictive of high earnings? To answer this, we found two datasets. Our first dataset “NBA Player Salaries (2000-2025)” contains player names, teams, seasons, and annual salaries. The second dataset, “Historical NBA Player Stats Database” includes individual season statistics for players such as points, assists, rebounds, and turnovers. To analyze these datasets we integrated on the Player Names and Season Identifiers, allowing for a comprehensive view of each player’s performance in a given season with their salaries. 

By linking performance metrics with corresponding salaries, we explored whether top performing players consistently earn more, and whether certain stats have a greater correlation with salary. Our preliminary findings suggest that the Points metric has the highest correlation with salaries, with a correlation of .503, while metrics like rebounds showed the weakest correlation of .391. This is found in [Correlation With Salries](Correlation_With_Salaries_Results.md). We also created a visualization to show the correlation between Salary and Points found in [Salary VS PTS](Salary_VS_PTS_Image.png). This makes sense as in the game of Basketball offensive production and scoring points wins you games. It shows the high value that General Managers are placing on points. One thing that surprised us is that Turnovers had a positive correlation rather than a negative correlation. We hypothesized that turnovers should be negative, as the more turnovers you have the worse you are playing. However, when thinking about this it does make sense. The highest paid players would obviously have the ball more often than others. They are getting paid to have the bulk of the Offensive Production. Having the ball in your hands more will lead you to turning the ball over more times as well. A player who isn’t paid a lot of money would not be the one running the team, it would be the player who has a higher salary. 

Throughout this project, we are emphasizing reproducibility and following best practices in data management. Our entire workflow has been documented, including the filesystem structure and naming conventions used to store raw and process datasets [File System](Filesystem_Documentation.md). Detailed instructions will be inclued in this file for downloading datasets, running the scripts, generating cleaned datasets, and reproducing the analysis. 



